GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm Gw
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Presi
surge and stumble -- why some fr
struggle to appeal to voters on
trail.
Also ahead this Monday: Lebanon'
political crisis. After basic se
garbage collection go unmet, pro
solutions from a divided, failin
Plus, as President Obama becomes
sitting president to visit the A
we examine how rising temperatur
ocean life in the Pacific.
STEPHEN PALUMBI, Director, Stanf
Hopkins Marine Station: It's not
that you can just turn around ve
Once it gets really bad enough s
having an incredible global effe
nothing you can do about it. You
it before that point.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The mass migration c
escalated today, as Austria held
and trains on its border with Hu
came as charges and countercharg
the human wave streaming into Eu
the Middle East and Africa.
We have a report from Fatima Man
Television News.
FATIMA MANJI: In Austria, there
controls on the roads heading in
but authorities denied violating
passport-free zone, saying this
traffickers after the bodies of
were found in a lorry last week.
MAN: This are not border control
We have diverse focus points whi
are looking for.
FATIMA MANJI: It was a scene rep
Germany, the country that now ex
800,000 refugees this year, far
any other E.U. state.
But faced with its own backlash
anti-migrant groups, German Chan
Merkel warned, all of Europe mus
responsibility.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
translator): If Europe fails on
of refugees, its close connectio
civil rights will be destroyed.
the Europe we imagine.
FATIMA MANJI: This Syrian woman
hours walking to the Hungarian b
her children.
WOMAN: No help. No help. The chi
help, family. Why, I don't know.
FATIMA MANJI: Hungary has now in
fence at its border with Serbia,
Germany of having boosted hopes
with its more permissive policie
this is what the French foreign
of Hungary's policy.
LAURENT FABIUS, French Foreign M
translator): Extremely harsh. Hu
of Europe, which has values, and
respect those values by putting
that we wouldn't even use for an
FATIMA MANJI: Quick to fire back
summoned the French ambassador o
comments.
And so, as the sight of migrants
becomes an everyday scene at Eur
there are extraordinary exchange
E.U. countries.
GWEN IFILL: E.U. foreign ministe
meet in mid-September to discuss
One of the world's largest food
announced a major push today on
General Mills said it plans to c
gas emissions 28 percent by 2025
will cost about $100 million.
Climate change is also the cente
President Obama's trip to Alaska
and we will talk about that late
Tropical weather dominated today
news. The Caribbean island of Do
to recover from Tropical Storm E
at least 20 people and inflicted
last week.
Farther out in the Atlantic, Hur
blew toward the Cape Verde Islan
Hurricane Ignacio weakened, and
Hawaiian Islands.
Police in Thailand are now hunti
suspects in the Bangkok shrine b
killed 20 people. They're lookin
woman and a foreign man of unkno
On Sunday, police and army troop
an apartment that the female sus
They found bomb-making materials
said today it's not just a homeg
SOMYOT POOMPUNMUANG, National Po
(through translator): First, the
issue of the route in and out of
second, the preparation of accom
third, the route of escape, four
of the bomb and components. Fore
cannot do all of this. There mus
people supporting them and invol
process.
GWEN IFILL: A man with a Turkish
was arrested on Saturday.
The Islamic State has targeted y
ancient site in the Syrian city
This time, it was the 2,000-year
of Bel. Local residents reported
there Sunday. But the extent of
is still unknown. It's the secon
temple the militants have attack
Back in this country, Wall Stree
again, finishing its worst month
three years. The Dow Jones indus
lost 115 points to close below 1
Nasdaq fell more than 50 points,
500 dropped 16. Meanwhile, oil p
nearly 9 percent, as new data sh
production has fallen. The price
trading settled at just over $49
And two deaths of note tonight.
Governor Marvin Mandel, who serv
time for political corruption, p
Sunday. The two-term governor wa
as an innovator, but he was conv
for mail fraud and racketeering.
was later overturned. Marvin Man
Spiro Agnew as governor in 1969,
old.
And horror film aficionados mour
of Wes Craven today. The writer/
Sunday of brain cancer. In 1984,
"Nightmare on Elm Street," and i
Freddy Krueger, carved a new pat
genre. He scored again with "Scr
setting off another wave of sequ
In 2010, Craven spoke to ABC's "
about the changes he wrought, es
depicting heroines.
WES CRAVEN, Director: Neve Campb
first "Scream" says, why should
in a horror film? They are alway
big-breasted girl with no brain,
talent who runs upstairs, instea
front door, you know? So, it's t
it's that sort of intelligence t
throughout these -- these films.
GWEN IFILL: Craven was 76 years
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
ahead in politics with Amy Walte
Keith; a trash epidemic triggers
in Lebanon, and much more.
Over the weekend, Republican and
presidential candidates were out
dodging slings and arrows, and p
themselves for the fall.
With Labor Day in sight, preside
are surging and stumbling.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential C
I love Nashville.
GWEN IFILL: Republican Donald Tr
Tuesday state Tennessee over the
still leads in early state polls
biggest surge belongs to rival B
In a Des Moines Register Iowa po
attracts 23 percent of likely ca
with Carson now just five points
A new Monmouth poll, also of Iow
today shows a Trump-Carson dead
surge, Wisconsin Governor Scott
in Iowa, dropping from first pla
ago, to third place now in one p
place in another.
On "Meet the Press" this weekend
tough on immigration, suggesting
be placed on U.S. borders, north
GOV. SCOTT WALKER (R-WI), Presid
Secure the border, enforce the l
GWEN IFILL: Jeb Bush, once the p
favorite, is also struggling, as
number of voters begin to view h
On the Democratic side, Bernie S
is expanding. The Des Moines Reg
has him just seven points behind
Both appeared at the Democratic
in Minneapolis, with Sanders tak
establishment leaders.
By contrast, Clinton courted the
her attacks on the top Republica
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D), Pres
Trump actually says he would do
job for women than I would.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile, many eyes
Vice President Joe Biden, who pa
visit to a Democratic Party even
this weekend, and announced plan
to Pittsburgh on Labor Day.
A perfect time to turn to Politi
with Tamara Keith of NPR and Amy
The Cook Political Report.
Tamara, late today, late in the
apparently, Hillary Clinton -- t
is going to release the latest t
Hillary Clinton's e-mails. This
-- there's the gift that keeps o
This is the drag that keeps on d
TAMARA KEITH, National Public Ra
And 9:00 p.m. Eastern time, grea
start poring through thousands o
e-mails.
The State Department said that a
them have been retroactively cla
they have been redacted, so ther
black marks on them. And that, o
just adds to the swirl around Hi
She's not going to be testifying
Benghazi committee until October
latest date, so this is going to
dragging and dragging and draggi
Every month, there will be anoth
of e-mail.
GWEN IFILL: And if they were ret
classified, that still is in kee
her defense on this, which is th
not classified at the time.
TAMARA KEITH: That's correct. Sh
to say that she never knowingly
anything that was classified at
nothing was marked classified.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about thi
Bernie Sanders. Hillary Clinton
20 points in Iowa. That is not p
potatoes.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political R
And, look, the Hillary Clinton p
tell, as I'm sure they have show
and time again, we always knew t
going to tighten, this should be
race, it always has been.
The really interesting thing tho
the tightening of the race in Io
New Hampshire as well with Berni
is that it's not because voters
place, Democratic voters, think
Clinton is less likable or that
ratings have gone up appreciably
It's that they see in Bernie San
that I think they connect with e
that they see as more authentic,
somebody who is enthusiastic. He
when he's out there campaigning,
happy warrior.
GWEN IFILL: The happy warrior.
AMY WALTER: Let's put it that wa
She still doesn't look as comfor
as -- like she's having as much
as he is.
GWEN IFILL: And yet we see her g
expected endorsements from Jeann
in New Hampshire, kind of a key
Vilsack, former governor of Iowa
a key state.
She is not -- a little soon to b
her out, isn't it?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, goodness gra
not actually losing in these pol
as the pollster in Iowa Ann Selz
starting to look like 2008 all o
That's not something Hillary Cli
wants to hear.
But they're not doing a major co
They're starting to announce the
But somebody who is a fan of Ber
isn't going to say, oh, gosh, Je
supports Hillary Clinton, maybe
my mind.
However, these big endorsements
things that Hillary Clinton has,
she has money. She has infrastru
has the top Democratic campaign
the country. She has armies of v
who they are working. They have
They have an organization.
And they promise -- her campaign
this time around they know how t
and they especially know how to
like Jeanne Shaheen.
GWEN IFILL: Joe Biden, should sh
worried that he might run or tha
not run, Amy?
AMY WALTER: Gosh, that is the pu
it?
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: The theory of Joe Bi
into the race, one theory, is th
help to engage this race and eng
Right now, she is fighting again
It's like boxing up against this
vs. against a real campaign, a r
And they can go out and have deb
the focus in the media will be a
candidates, what they're saying,
Sanders is saying, as opposed to
being filled with stories about
problems.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about the
the 17 of them, but actually jus
five of them, because, all of a
Carson is looking strong in Iowa
there?
TAMARA KEITH: It's a good questi
I think most likely what's happe
the evangelical voters, the vote
the past voted for Rick Santorum
Huckabee, they aren't going for
and Mike Huckabee, who are both
time.
GWEN IFILL: Or Ted Cruz.
TAMARA KEITH: Or Ted Cruz.
GWEN IFILL: Yet.
TAMARA KEITH: Yet. They're going
And he is -- just like Donald Tr
not a politician. He's just a re
talented neurosurgeon who became
for president because people tol
run for president. He has ads ru
And right by the airport in Des
least last time I was there, the
giant billboard. I don't think h
actually put it up. But there wa
billboard.
GWEN IFILL: And all around the s
as well when I was there.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Does that mean that
has made it easier or harder for
thought of themselves as outside
race? He is the ultimate outside
AMY WALTER: He's the ultimate ou
Ben Carson is as well.
And Carly Fiorina can count hers
outsider.
And none of them have any politi
They haven't been elected to any
if you add up in national polls
Iowa polls the percent that is g
candidate with zero political ex
it is about 40 to 45 percent. Yo
at this point Republicans -- 40
the Republican base is looking f
who is not just an outsider, lik
been a governor or I haven't bee
Washington for awhile, but reall
in public office.
GWEN IFILL: Never been in public
Let me ask you an interesting th
the two insiders, perceived insi
former -- one current governor,
Scott Walker, Jeb Bush. Donald T
there taking real shots at Jeb B
seems to be working. What has ha
Jeb Bush and Scott Walker, who w
be strongest people in the race
ago?
TAMARA KEITH: I think with Jeb B
a certain element of not wanting
who the inevitable candidate is.
that there's been resistance to
Jeb Bush has the money, he has t
but he hasn't gotten people exci
Walker initially that that bump,
he hasn't been getting people ex
lately either.
GWEN IFILL: And is perceived as
some unforced errors along the w
AMY WALTER: Policy stumbles, as
was the committed conservative.
guy with the record in Wisconsin
labor unions, succeeding both in
back, as well as being reelected
And since Trump's success, what
is, it looks like he's just not
to his own position, that he's m
from some of the positions he to
ago or two years ago. So, there'
about, where is his center, numb
why is he moving away from the m
has helped him get this far?
GWEN IFILL: Does that leave room
else who is in the race to get i
little split between Trump up he
Bush and Walker kind of not doin
AMY WALTER: I think Marco Rubio
in a very interesting position,
you look just on paper, he has t
to grow in terms of people who s
him vs. people who say they don'
And he still appeals to a very b
of voters within the Republican
problem is, nobody is really pay
to him.
GWEN IFILL: Oh, well, wait. Mayb
all start to pay attention next
a debate in a couple weeks.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Amy Walter, Tamara K
you both.
TAMARA KEITH: Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Next: a closer look
hacks of U.S. data are being use
and Russia to target U.S. spies.
Today's Los Angeles Times report
services in those two nations ar
cross-referencing leaked informa
security clearances, airline rec
insurance forms, to reveal the i
of intelligence officers and age
Jeffrey Brown has more.
JEFFREY BROWN: We hear about the
data breaches all the time. Toda
connects some of the dots in a c
claiming, for example, that at l
network of American engineers an
who work with U.S. undercover ag
has already been compromised.
One of the article's authors, L.
Brian Bennett, joins me now.
And welcome to you.
So, we hear about these acts. Th
what happens afterwards, right,
and putting together the informa
kind of clues are they looking f
BRIAN BENNETT, The Los Angeles T
right now, countries like China
are collecting massive amounts o
the lives of Americans and the l
workers.
And this is going to allow them
on people and know about their m
their banking information, if th
difficulties and might be vulner
or something else, their -- any
that may have come out, their co
overseas. And all this informati
together in massive databases an
computers can crunch them and gi
detailed view of people travelin
JEFFREY BROWN: You even seen cit
-- we all remember like the U.S.
Personnel Management database la
and millions of amounts of infor
people. And then there's the mor
the Ashley Madison database, rig
sort of put all these things tog
it difficult to do?
BRIAN BENNETT: It is difficult t
it's technical to do.
But computers have become so adv
that countries like China and Ru
capable of doing this, and not o
but they can work with criminal
their own countries, Chinese hac
companies. And they can collect
put it together.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, this is one
that struck me in your article.
about governments, China and Rus
but working with mobs, mob group
with private companies in their
to do this. Why would they be wo
such groups?
BRIAN BENNETT: So, in the case o
example, intelligence officials
the data breaches that have been
with China, and they determined
a hacking ring, a criminal hacki
is working at the behest of the
And that ring, for example, was
data that was stolen from Anthem
That was 80 million files on dif
stolen from that. And that infor
made it to the black market. Usu
there's a big data breach like t
would be sold to the highest bid
it never appeared.
And so intelligence officials ar
that the hack was done at the be
foreign government and that Chin
that information combined with o
they have stolen from U.S. gover
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, now, s
using, because that's what also
out here, is not just the gather
the cross-indexing, but the usin
information, you say there's bee
some evidence of at least one ne
has been compromised. What do we
in that case?
BRIAN BENNETT: So, what was desc
by these officials I spoke with
was that they aren't concerned a
so much about the trained spies,
who have had years and years of
doing this work.
They're more concerned about a n
American scientists and engineer
day jobs, but occasionally they
for the intelligence community.
an expertise, and when asked the
and they have a security clearan
Well, now, because China was beh
data breach that was able to dig
security clearance files, they n
can cross-index information on p
records, people's health care re
whether they have a security cle
not.
JEFFREY BROWN: And compromised i
means, do we know how -- was the
given to these scientists or pre
them?
BRIAN BENNETT: So, intelligence
say that they have evidence that
this information and is using it
We don't know exactly how they a
And in the espionage world, spy
they try to hide their tracks, a
won't necessarily detain or hold
One warning that was given out t
officials, for example, was that
at an airport and someone approa
they seem to have a lot in commo
be very wary of that. So, there
sort of soft advances is what th
community is talking about.
JEFFREY BROWN: And are authoriti
you that they suspect this has h
other cases, that there are othe
BRIAN BENNETT: Yes.
They're very concerned about tha
they're concerned about the Russ
doing this, the Chinese governme
also concerned about the Iranian
being able to collect these mass
of data and use it to identify p
with U.S. intelligence.
JEFFREY BROWN: And do we know wh
U.S. is taking, are able to take
any of this?
BRIAN BENNETT: So, right now, th
aggressively trying to educate t
work force, and tell them, look,
travel overseas, here is what yo
be worried about. When you're si
desk and you receive an e-mail t
like it's from aunt May and it h
be very careful, because these f
services know so much about you,
cater these messages and convinc
on a link that may damage or col
off of government servers.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
Brian Bennett of The L.A. Times,
much.
BRIAN BENNETT: Good to be with y
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": why
changes threaten the mass extinc
in the world's oceans; a critic'
the nuclear deal with Iran; and
and old are learning from one an
green spaces of Detroit.
But, first, President Obama made
simply by becoming the first sit
president to set foot in the Ala
In anticipation of the trip, the
White House made another kind of
announcing that Mount McKinley,
highest peak, will be returned t
name, Denali.
William Brangham has more on the
trip.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On his three-d
president will attend a meeting
known as the Arctic Council. And
the need for action on climate c
president will visit some of Ala
and then meet with native Alaska
have been affected by rising tid
For more on the president's trip
by journalist Elizabeth Arnold,
Elizabeth Arnold, three days is
for a president to make. We know
is going to be stressing the nee
climate change, but why now and
ELIZABETH ARNOLD, NPR Contributo
started out as just a drop-in by
of State John Kerry, and then it
this three-day visit by the pres
the White House saw this as a gr
for the president to build a sen
for addressing climate change an
for the upcoming meeting in Pari
leaders will try to negotiate an
to cut carbon emissions.
The idea, obviously, is to put a
impact of a warming climate. And
a few officials have described t
Alaska is the place where coasta
are eroding into the sea and hav
glaciers are receding at a rapid
-- everything is happening here
faster pace, almost like a time
And the U.S. has just assumed ch
of what is called the Arctic Cou
nations are involved for -- the
And most Americans don't even kn
Arctic nation. And we have been
the council for 13 years before
a representative to the meeting.
But now, because of the warming
is suddenly interested in the Ar
variety of reasons. And the U.S.
a leadership position for the ne
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, Alaska
a very interesting place to talk
change. As you describe, there's
in the state because of climate
it's also a state that is hugely
upon the fossil fuels that drive
ELIZABETH ARNOLD: Absolutely.
The impacts of climate change ar
for some and an opportunity for
mean, here in Alaska, it's extre
fall storms, permafrost that is
permanent, walrus falling out on
hundreds of thousands. And this
impacted indigenous people here,
who live on the coast and depend
and fishing so subsist.
On the other hand, less ice mean
And if you're in the business of
oil, it means it's a good thing.
a safer season, better transit f
So, it's kind of a blessing and
on your perspective.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It seems like
contradiction as well, that the
wants to talk about reducing fos
and yet he's been criticized qui
for just granting Shell a permit
more fossil fuels out of Alaska.
I mean, is he giving a bit of a
there?
ELIZABETH ARNOLD: They don't see
They see it -- that the rational
they reiterate it repeatedly --
new sources of oil, domestic oil
transition from dependence on fo
But it's risky, William. I was j
an icebreaker several weeks in t
and it was 20-foot, 30-foot seas
been a storm out in the Chukchi
week that forced Shell to suspen
And the coast has been pounded b
surge.
Secretary Kerry last night descr
a test. He said he's always been
offshore drilling, but, in this
leases were sold. The president
it could be done safely. And, ba
saying Shell now has to prove --
has to prove itself, that it's a
Meanwhile, other nations, though
Russia, are looking to exploit n
gas opportunities off the Arctic
So, we're not the only ones.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Yes. As you me
has obviously been taking stakin
claim there, as these seas and s
open up. Will that be part of th
at the Arctic Council meeting th
well?
ELIZABETH ARNOLD: It will.
Russia has sent a delegation, no
members of the delegation. They
the most aggressive nation. They
on recently unannounced military
which involves thousands of vess
in the Arctic.
They also just resubmitted their
almost 500,000 square miles of t
Ocean, including the North Pole.
Norway, and Canada, also members
are also submitting claims to th
And Russia says it's also going
stations all along the Northern
and rebuild military bases all a
Arctic. And I asked Secretary Ke
this posture last night, and it
He said the U.S. should be cauti
about what the Russians are and
which is really an important poi
A lot of this is theatrics. I wa
the Chukchi coast just recently
and some of the very places wher
are going to be located, William
abandoned buildings with polar b
inside. So, some of this is talk
Russia is in the midst of a seve
recession. Oil prices are low. A
as we all in the media kind of w
this as this race to control the
the U.S. is lagging behind, it's
what is happening. Russia has be
in the Arctic Council thus far,
by consensus. And any kind of te
claims also have to be settled b
and all of the Arctic nations at
day.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right. Eli
from Anchorage, thank you so muc
ELIZABETH ARNOLD: Thank you, Wil
GWEN IFILL: While global leaders
action on climate change, one ne
emerged in the world's oceans.
As Scott Shafer from our San Fra
KQED reports, the threat may not
to the naked eye, but it changes
chemistry of essential parts of
ecosystem.
SCOTT SHAFER, KQED: Coral reefs
vibrant and teeming with life, m
to the future of the world's oce
STEPHEN PALUMBI, Director, Stanf
Hopkins Marine Station: Coral re
up a fraction of 1 percent of th
they hold 25 percent of the ocea
Not only that, but they feed hun
of people, and a billion people
some income from coral reefs. So
ecosystem that is really fundame
on the planet.
SCOTT SHAFER: Steve Palumbi is t
of Stanford University's Hopkins
He has studied coral reefs aroun
For decades, warming ocean water
even killed coral. But Palumbi s
are now facing an insidious thre
chemical change that is making o
more acidic.
STEPHEN PALUMBI: Ocean acidifica
the entire globe's oceans. And i
organisms by reducing their grow
by making it more difficult to m
We know that fish actually react
differently.
SCOTT SHAFER: With ocean surface
30 percent more acidic than they
centuries ago, protecting the re
is no easy task.
STEPHEN PALUMBI: It's not a prob
just turn around very quickly. I
that, once it gets really bad en
it's having an incredible global
nothing you can do about it. You
it before that point.
SCOTT SHAFER: The increase in ac
the result of people burning coa
other fossil fuels. That pumps m
of carbon dioxide into the atmos
then sinks into the ocean waters
of nine billion tons per year.
The carbon dioxide robs the ocea
element that corals and other an
to thrive.
STEPHEN PALUMBI: Corals make ske
the white part of the coral reef
skeletons are made of calcium ca
carbonate tends to dissolve if t
in the water gets too high.
SCOTT SHAFER: This model shows h
chemistry has changed since 1885
it is expected to change over th
years. The blue represents ocean
good for shell and coral growth.
represents conditions that make
for many animals to grow shells
JIM BARRY, Monterey Bay Aquarium
Institute: There's a few of them
Most of them might be deeper.
SCOTT SHAFER: Jim Barry is a sen
at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Res
He is looking at the effects of
on a variety of sea life, includ
coral.
JIM BARRY: The ocean critters ou
faced with a faster and larger c
chemistry than they have seen fo
300 million years, through much
history.
SCOTT SHAFER: Barry says, if one
an entire food web can suffer.
Barry and researcher Charles Boc
how ocean acidification affects
whether it interferes with the a
the shellfish to reproduce.
Inside a chilly lab, Boch is ind
abalones to spawn. Each female r
of small green eggs through its
holes. An abalone can spawn tens
of eggs at a time. In one tank a
in another, the males.
MAN: What you are seeing here is
clouds, white streams that are t
released.
SCOTT SHAFER: Boch and Barry are
eggs and sperm together in water
levels of acidity to examine how
fertilization.
JIM BARRY: Maybe what we saw in
where fertilization was lower in
it's because the sperm are not s
fast.
SCOTT SHAFER: Their research sug
ocean acidification significantl
the abalones' fertilization rate
are an important source of food
who in turn help keep kelp fores
JIM BARRY: We know that ocean ac
is huge. This is one of the bigg
that has happened to this earth
many tens of millions of years.
environmental change that's happ
in front of us.
SCOTT SHAFER: Terry Sawyer runs
an oyster farm on Tomales Bay, 3
of San Francisco.
TERRY SAWYER, Hog Island Oyster
is a big Pacific oyster. This is
will get.
SCOTT SHAFER: Sawyer says ocean
is already affecting his busines
TERRY SAWYER: It's really scary.
scary place to be.
SCOTT SHAFER: The wakeup call fo
in 2005. That's when there were
at oyster hatcheries along the O
Washington coasts. Those hatcher
Sawyer and many other shellfish
the seeds and larvae they needed
oysters.
TERRY SAWYER: The larvae was com
and their seed was completely dy
is not a way to run a business.
SCOTT SHAFER: Sawyer says he is
not only for his business, but f
animals who live in or depend on
TERRY SAWYER: It feels like we'r
of being the canary in the coal
thing is, I am holding a canary.
have got a responsibility to say
right, we have symptoms here tha
animal just died. OK, what are w
do now?
SCOTT SHAFER: Sawyer and researc
the University of California, Da
monitoring the water quality in
TERRY SAWYER: The purple line is
SCOTT SHAFER: The data helps Saw
oyster farmers in the area adjus
schedules. To prepare for changi
Hog Island is building its own h
A larger oyster hatchery has alr
to Hawaii, leaving the more caus
of the Pacific Northwest.
JIM BARRY: That's great for that
but what does it mean for all th
that are already living there? T
move.
SCOTT SHAFER: Jim Barry fears it
be too late to save coral reefs.
out that four of the last five b
on Earth included ocean acidific
say it's unclear if ocean acidif
reached a tipping point.
STEPHEN PALUMBI: Some people thi
be 80 years from being there. No
the last generation where we can
change the trajectory.
SCOTT SHAFER: For the "PBS NewsH
Scott Shafer in Monterey, Califo
GWEN IFILL: Later tonight on PBS
the recovery of Monterey Bay, Ca
In a BBC co-production over the
nights, "Big Blue Live" will tel
of whales, sea otters and other
who have returned to the bay aft
disappeared decades ago.
Over the weekend, Oregon Democra
became the 31st senator to annou
for the Iran nuclear agreement.
puts President Obama three votes
winning a veto-proof majority in
That would derail any resolution
the agreement.
Tonight, we continue our series
on the Iran nuclear deal. Last t
from a former head of Israel's M
agency who supports the agreemen
Tonight, we hear from an opponen
Rademaker was an assistant secre
for the Bureaus of Arms Control
Security and Nonproliferation un
George W. Bush. He's now a princ
Podesta Group in Washington and
to the Bipartisan Policy Center.
Thank you for joining us.
In a nutshell, what is your oppo
this deal as it is written now?
STEPHEN RADEMAKER, Former U.S. A
Official: I believe there are nu
flaws with the agreement.
But the single most important on
it basically locks in that Iran
threshold nuclear weapons state.
that Iran is going to be able, i
order, to produce nuclear weapon
GWEN IFILL: Explain to people th
between threshold, just a little
question, and actually having th
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: Well, being o
means a country can be very, ver
actually having a nuclear weapon
actually produced one. The term
that they can be a screwdriver's
from actually putting together a
And experts have said for years,
that if Iran is allowed to becom
nuclear weapon state, that will
a cascade of nuclear proliferati
Middle East, which of course is
region of the world. And there a
there that, if Iran was allowed
capability, they are going to wa
that same capability.
GWEN IFILL: And so your reading
is that by doing this, we are em
instead of weakening it?
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: Exactly.
You need to distinguish between
and the long term. The president
to sell this agreement has focus
short term. And his argument, hi
in favor of the agreement is tha
reduce Iran's nuclear breakout t
or three months today to a year,
I should say it will extend thei
break -- it will take longer for
a nuclear weapon, to produce the
the fissile material, the highly
uranium they would need for a nu
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: And that is t
short term.
But in the long term, President
that starting in about 13 years,
time will reduce to almost zero.
GWEN IFILL: And when you testifi
to Congress, you described it as
bargain.
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: Exactly. Faus
mythological figure who sold his
the -- to the devil in exchange
powers for -- I think it was 26
For 26 years, he had magical pow
end of 26 years, the devil came
soul. And I think that is a pret
to what this deal provides. For
it's not a bad deal. After 10 ye
a horrible deal and it gives Ira
they have always wanted. After -
Obama concedes, after 13 years,
time is almost zero.
GWEN IFILL: When you were a cong
aide, you were party to the conv
the agreed framework involving N
Is this different or the same, o
apples and oranges?
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: I think they
in the sense they were both Faus
The agreed framework with North
a good deal for us in the short
a very bad deal in the long term
however, was that, in the case o
there was a reason to believe th
devil came to claim our soul, wh
-- the benefits of the deal reve
to the other side, that there wo
different government in North Ko
But, remember, this was in 1994,
regimes were collapsing all over
And so it wasn't unreasonable to
1994 that, in 15 years or whenev
had to be delivered to North Kor
would be a very different regime
would be gone from North Korea,
was gone from Russia and all of
Of course, we know today communi
there, so in fact would have bee
I think the difference with the
is, there's absolutely no reason
that in 10 or 15 years, we will
different regime in Iran. Quite
This agreement is going to resul
immediate transfer to Iran of so
$100 billion and $150 dollars, w
is an enormous amount of money,
the size of their economy and th
GWEN IFILL: But let's talk about
problem here, because part of th
is -- part of the stick and the
in this deal was that the sancti
eventually be lifted, that Iran
basically to feed their people a
And you're saying that's exactly
perverse incentive, that would e
part of the empowering.
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: Well, I'm say
be empowered because of the rest
nuclear activities will go away.
they're going to be empowered in
sense.
In an economic sense, yes, they
economically as a result of the
first instance, they get a huge
because there's money, pursuant
sanctions, that is being segrega
was being held in foreign banks.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: They will get
Then they will get increased tra
ability to export their oil, inc
investment in their economy. So,
longer term, there will be many
benefits.
And I'm not saying it would be a
to trade that for meaningful lon
restrictions on Iran's nuclear p
problem I have is, we have trade
to Iran in exchange for very sho
if 13 years ago, 15 years ago, P
had cut a deal with Iran that sa
15 years, you behave, but at the
years, you can pretty much do wh
want. You can be a screwdriver's
from having a nuclear weapon.
Had President Bush cut that deal
ago, we'd be cursing him today.
GWEN IFILL: So, do you also thin
deal in some way, because of tho
incentives, because -- are propp
current regime, that they do not
disincentive for this regime or
environment to change?
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: I think endin
and delivering these significant
benefits to the Iranian regime,
to support the regime, which is
this is not at all like North Ko
there was a reason in 1994 to be
the tide of history was running
regimes in Asia.
(CROSSTALK)
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: There's no re
-- there's no objective reason,
the situation in the Middle East
that the Iranian regime is going
big trouble after this deal.
GWEN IFILL: So, as we reported,
seems to be rolling up support o
by one. He's now at 31. And ther
about whether he -- where he nee
to make sure that he wins this d
What -- assuming this passes for
assuming that you can't quite ma
strongly enough to members of Co
the vote happens, what can be do
to make this a less harmful deal
your perspective?
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: Well, I don't
alone is saying the biggest prob
what is referred to as the sunse
the fact that, beginning in 10 y
the years thereafter, the restri
away.
Everyone who studies this who is
expert on the subject says that,
the biggest weakness. And there
of experts convened by the Washi
for Near East Policy that includ
President Obama's former adviser
his nuclear nonproliferation exp
And they agreed that this was a
And they said the United States
tell the Iranians that, notwiths
is in this deal, as a matter of
policy, we're not going to allow
fissile material in the quantity
could use to produce a weapon.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: If the U.S. could ju
and have it happen, wouldn't tha
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: You know, I h
conversation with some of these
very -- former national security
very senior people who signed on
statement.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: And I think t
should be held to it.
And I think, if we're trying to
of a very, very bad deal, which
think we may be forced to do if
are not there in Congress to dis
then the advice we got from this
probably pretty good. We ought t
Iranians that, notwithstanding w
you won in the negotiation, you
a world of hurt if you try to pr
weapon.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Stephen Rademaker of the Biparti
Center, among other things, than
much.
STEPHEN RADEMAKER: My pleasure.
GWEN IFILL: We turn now to anoth
of the Middle East, Lebanon, whe
surrounding trash and what to do
sparked a political movement tha
the country's leadership.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
reports from Beirut.
JANE FERGUSON: People here are a
their government cannot provide
even the most basic services.
MAN: We want to say that this is
electricity, no water. We are in
and we are asking for our needs.
JANE FERGUSON: The Lebanese gove
increasingly so ineffective, peo
even rely on trash collection. A
of water shortages and rolling p
the halting of garbage collectio
tipping point.
Whether you are a Christian, Mus
life without basic services is a
These popular protests are the f
modern history to not be centere
or political parties. Keeping it
will be the biggest challenge fo
WOMAN: When you walk between the
can see people from everywhere.
people from all the religions. Y
people from all the regions in L
the south, from the north, from
JANE FERGUSON: Is that unusual i
WOMAN: Yes, it is unusual.
JANE FERGUSON: Lebanon's governm
up between the country's Muslim,
and Druze factions. After the br
civil war from 1975 to 1990, pow
became even more important. It k
but at a cost.
When politicians disagree, gover
to a halt. This summer, Lebanon'
dump reached capacity, and it wa
before the country's leaders cou
a new one. In the midst of a hea
of stinking garbage are everywhe
movement used the hashtag #YouSt
for protests.
After violent clashes with prote
the main government building, a
wall was erected. Some poked fun
This sign in Arabic reads: "Than
this wall. It helps us express o
The wall was quickly removed.
The government did get the messa
tried to deal with the crisis. A
solution to keep trash off the s
the capital is to truck it out i
to various areas and illegally d
now it's increasingly common for
of stinking rubbish to be dumped
of great natural beauty.
Lebanon's landscape is one of th
in the Middle East. But illegal
turning a political crisis into
one. Shocking images like this a
people to the protests.
Nadine Mazloum lives in a rural
an illegal garbage dump.
NADINE MAZLOUM, Local Resident:
because the government has a mon
the garbage. It's a multimillion
industry. It creates so much mon
government, and that's why it do
to let go -- it doesn't want to
the privatization of the garbage
JANE FERGUSON: Like many in Leba
corruption, saying the companies
bidding to get the contracts to
are connected to the politicians
NADINE MAZLOUM: Of course, of co
until now, it's -- we have had g
the streets for over a month. An
like they can't find a solution.
that they can't find a solution.
want to find a solution. They ju
be able to divide that pie, that
among themselves. It's really ob
JANE FERGUSON: Fabulous wealth i
in Lebanon, and the income divid
much wider. The civil war in nei
has caused over one million refu
to Lebanon, a country of less th
People here are worried their go
too weak to run the country.
MAN: All the people, they are fe
the insecurity, with instability
with corruption, with the lack o
with polluted water, with the ab
paralysis of the government, the
the parliament, which means a no
country, as if we are becoming a
JANE FERGUSON: Protest organizer
the government until tomorrow ni
a solution to the crisis and fir
minister. Otherwise, they say th
protests across the country.
But demands are also being made
changes, like calls for fresh pa
elections. It will be a signific
in Lebanon's history if a grassr
that includes people from all re
sects can create real political
Jane Ferguson, "PBS NewsHour," B
GWEN IFILL: And finally, we brin
blast of summer from the southwe
of Detroit.
For generations, Clark Park has
people opportunities to grow and
community leaders and passionate
Student Reporting Labs fellow Ev
produced this story while intern
Public Television.
MAN: For this community, this is
Park. A lot of people call it th
WOMAN: Our park is the best kept
Detroit. It's a jewel for everyb
ZIGGY GONZALEZ, Co-Founder, Clar
We didn't know if we were going
in keeping it open without the c
But we did it that first year. A
the city got the message after t
had closed seven other parks, th
and they noticed Clark Park was
because the community went to ba
park.
ANTHONY BENAVIDES, Executive Dir
Park: So we were running a progr
school and during the summer, yo
here at Clark Park.
There's always been baseball her
Park for over a hundred years. A
we have added tennis, lacrosse,
I'm trying to say, hey, listen,
you're playing, recreating, gues
is right around the corner. What
to do here?
Graduation rates at Western High
is right behind us here, in Sout
has improved dramatically. And w
day with our kids. Every semeste
more kids are graduating from hi
We have programs for kids that a
about going to college. We help
their ACT exams, prepare them fo
or SAT exams. We also take them
tours within Michigan.
BELICIA FLORES, Student: I want
at by, like, a lot of colleges a
Park has helped me in more ways
imagine. Like, Clark Park is who
MAN: Yes, I still feel that the
still here at age 84 is to help
out and to keep them away from d
and to give them a positive opti
We want them to go to college an
of their lives.
STUDENT: Everybody around here i
and they want you to do good. An
you to succeed. And it's like --
feeling knowing that there's peo
care.
MAN: Good job. Good job.
WOMAN: The older girls teach the
And the younger girls, they teac
girls, as I call them. So, every
work in progress here. And nobod
denied anything.
HERIBERTO GALLEGOS, Clark Park:
ethnic diversity or economic div
just want to be a part of the co
no amount of money in the world
you that sense, that feeling, th
MAN: That's all you want is to b
opportunity to better your life.
place I would rather be than at
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour" on
Katrina scattered thousands of G
foster children across the count
later, are these vulnerable chil
safe in the event of a disaster
You can find that story on our h
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for to
Tomorrow, we launch Rethinking R
series on solutions to some of t
most pressing problems, with spe
Charlayne Hunter-Gault. We begin
to improve academic outcomes for
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here to
For all of us here at the "PBS N
thank you, and good night.